Add draft Multichain API MIPs (#54)
MetaMask/metamask-improvement-proposals: MIPs/mip-x-evmmultichainapi.md

Reviewer: Thoughts on the filename? I feel like more dashes here is probably fine? 
`MIPs/mip-x-evm-multichain-api.md` 

same for the other file

Author: haha, that's due to my lack of confidence in the script I added to autonumber MIPs.

---
mip: x
title: Multichain API for Ethereum
status: Draft
stability: n/a

> discussions-to: https://github.com/MetaMask/metamask-improvement-proposals/discussions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
discussions-to: https://github.com/MetaMask/metamask-improvement-proposals/discussions/53
```

author(s): Alex Donesky (@adonesky1), Jiexi Luan (@jiexi), Vandan Parikh(@vandan) 
type: Maintainer
created: 2024-10-28
---

## Summary

> This proposal supplements [MIP-x](./mip-x-multichainapi.md) with additional specifications for Ethereum-compatible networks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This proposal supplements [MIP-x](./mip-x-multichainapi.md) with additional specifications for Ethereum-compatible (EVM) networks.
```

## Motivation

> Developers building against Ethereum-compatible networks stand to benefit the most from the simplified developer experience associated with the Multichain API. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Current single chain EVM Wallet APIs severely limit EVM dapp development and cause a great deal of unnecessary friction for users operating in an ecosystem with rapidly growing number of chains. As such builders and end users stand to benefit tremendously from the improved DevEx and UX that the Multichain API will provide. 
```

> The Multichain API and associated CAIP standards promise to enable the following benefits for these developers:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Multichain API will enable the following benefits for developers:
```

- Elimination of excessive error handling involved with chain-switching across EVM networks

> - Ability to use interface negotiation to adopt innovative wallet features, while gracefully degrading for wallets that may not yet support them

Reviewer: novel vs innovative?

Author: I hate using the word innovative, so an alternative such as "novel" is preferred 🙏

> - Elimination of excessive error handling involved with chain-switching across EVM networks
> - Employ interface negotiation patterns to adopt novel wallet features, while gracefully degrading for wallets that may not yet support them
> - Ability to simultaneously interact with multiple networks
> - Be notified of updates across multiple networks

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Concurrent cross chain state reading
- Elimination of chain switching
- Improved connection flows, with better interfaces for dapps to understand wallet capabilities and add missing networks on the fly.
```

## Usage Example
### Request
An example structure for a JSON-RPC request that an application would send to request authorization(s) from MetaMask:

```js
{
  "id": 1,
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "method": "wallet_createSession",
  "params": {
    "optionalScopes": {
      "wallet:eip155": {
        "methods": ["wallet_addEthereumChain"],
      },
      "eip155:1": {
        "methods": ["eth_sendTransaction","eth_call","eth_getBalance","eth_blockNumber","eth_getTransactionCount","wallet_watchAsset","eth_subscribe"],
        "notifications": ["message"],
      },
      "eip155:59144": {
        "methods": ["eth_sendTransaction","eth_call","eth_getBalance","eth_blockNumber","eth_getTransactionCount","wallet_watchAsset","eth_subscribe"],
        "notifications": ["message"],
      },
    },
    "scopedProperties": {
      "eip155:1": {

>         "rpcEndpoints": [{ 

Reviewer 2: @jiexi did we decide to reuse the term `rpcEndpoints` here? Or did we want something like `networkConfigurations`?

Reviewer: we're were previously nesting these under `scopedProperties[scopeString].eip3085` and only allowing one rpc endpoint to be suggested

          "chainName": "Ethereum (Infura)",
          "rpcUrls": ["https://mainnet.infura.io"],
          "nativeCurrency": {
              "name": "ETH",
              "symbol": "ETH",
              "decimals": 18,
          },
          "iconURLs": ["https://example.com/ethereum.svg"] 
        }],  
      },
      "eip155:59144": {
        "rpcEndpoints": [{ 
          "chainName": "Linea (Infura)",
          "rpcUrls": ["https://rpc.linea.build"],
          "nativeCurrency": {
              "name": "ETH",
              "symbol": "ETH",
              "decimals": 18,
          },
          "iconURLs": ["https://example.com/linea.svg"] 
        }],
      },
    },
  },

> }

Reviewer: should be nested under `scopedProperties.scopeString.eip3085`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    "scopedProperties" = {
  "eip155:1": {
    "eip3085": {
          "rpcEndpoints": [{
            "chainName": "Ethereum (Infura)",
          "rpcUrls": ["https://mainnet.infura.io"],
          "nativeCurrency": {
              "name": "ETH",
              "symbol": "ETH",
              "decimals": 18,
          },
          "iconURLs": ["https://example.com/ethereum.svg"]
        }],
      },
      "eip155:59144": {
        "eip3085": {
          "rpcEndpoints": [{
          "chainName": "Linea (Infura)",
          "rpcUrls": ["https://rpc.linea.build"],
          "nativeCurrency": {
              "name": "ETH",
              "symbol": "ETH",
              "decimals": 18,
          },
          "iconURLs": ["https://example.com/linea.svg"]
        }],
      },
    },
  },
};
```

```

### Response
An example structure for the corresponding JSON-RPC response that an application would receive from the wallet:

```js
{
  "id": 1,
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "result": {
    "sessionScopes": { 
      "eip155:wallet": {

>           "methods": ["wallet_addEthereumChain"],

Reviewer: @adonesky1 we're just going to return all methods and notifications to start. worth calling that out in this example? Maybe with `...`?

          "accounts": ["eip155:wallet:0x0910e12C68d02B561a34569E1367c9AAb42bd810"]
      },
      "eip155:1": {
        "methods": ["eth_sendTransaction","eth_call","eth_getBalance","eth_blockNumber","eth_getTransactionCount","wallet_watchAsset","eth_subscribe"],

>         "notifications": ["message"],

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        "notifications": ["eth_subscription"],
```

        "accounts": ["eip155:1:0x0910e12C68d02B561a34569E1367c9AAb42bd810"]
      },
      "eip155:59144": {
        "methods": ["eth_sendTransaction","eth_call","eth_getBalance","eth_blockNumber","eth_getTransactionCount","wallet_watchAsset","eth_subscribe"],

>         "notifications": ["message"],

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        "notifications": ["eth_subscription"],
```

        "accounts": ["eip155:59144:0x0910e12C68d02B561a34569E1367c9AAb42bd810"]
      },
    },      
  }
}
```

# Proposal

## Language
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" written in uppercase in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

## Definitions

## Proposal Specification

### Valid scopeStrings

`scopeObjects` must conform to [CAIP-217](https://chainagnostic.org/CAIPs/caip-217)

> Valid CAIP-217 `scopeStrings` for Ethereum-compatible networks shall include and will initially be limited to:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Valid CAIP-217 `scopeStrings` for EVM networks shall include and will initially be limited to:
```

> - `wallet` - for general authorizations that are unrelated to a specific network or `namespace`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `wallet` - for general authorizations that are unrelated to a specific network or `namespace` (e.g. `wallet_scanQRCode`)
```

> - `wallet:eip155` - for authorizations that are particular to the `eip155` `namespace`, but involve a function that is not specific to a particular network

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `wallet:eip155` - for methods that are particular to EVM networks (e.g. the `eip155` namespace), but do not target a specific network (e.g. `wallet_addEthereumChain`)
```

- `eip155:[reference]` - for chain-specific authorizations using a [CAIP-2](https://github.com/ChainAgnostic/CAIPs/blob/main/CAIPs/caip-2.md) identifier with both an `eip155` `namespace` and `reference`

### Valid scopedProperties

> When a MetaMask user does not have an existing network configured for a given `eip155[reference]` scope, including metadata for `rpcEndpoints` in the `scopedProperties` serves as a suggestion for the user to add the RPC network. MetaMask will expect the `rpcEndpoints` parameter to conform with the [EIP-3085](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-3085) standard.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A dapp may include metadata for `rpcEndpoints` in the `scopedProperties` object to suggest users add a given network which the wallet instance does not have installed. MetaMask will expect the `rpcEndpoints` parameter to conform to the [EIP-3085](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-3085) standard interface.
```

> > **Note:** MetaMask does not yet support prompting for RPC additions as part of the [CAIP-25](https://chainagnostic.org/CAIPs/caip-25) connection flow, but may do so in the future. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Note:** MetaMask does not yet support network additions via the [CAIP-25](https://chainagnostic.org/CAIPs/caip-25) connection flow, but will in the future. 
```

### API Specification Document
An OpenRPC [specification for the Multichain API](https://github.com/MetaMask/api-specs/blob/main/multichain/openrpc.yaml) can be found in the [api-specs](https://github.com/MetaMask/api-specs) repository.

## Caveats

> While most existing Ethereum methods will be familiar under the Multichain API, the new API renders some standard methods and events either redundant or incompatible with the new interaction patterns. The following Ethereum standards will not be supported through the Multichain API. However, they will remain accessible through the EIP-1193 interface for backward compatibility.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While most existing Ethereum methods will be familiar under the Multichain API, the new API renders some methods redundant or incompatible in the new API flows. The following Ethereum methods will not be supported through the Multichain API. However, they will remain accessible through the injected [EIP-1193][eip-1193] API for backwards compatibility.
```

        "notifications": ["eth_subscription"],
      },
      "eip155:59144": {
        "methods": ["eth_sendTransaction","eth_call","eth_getBalance","eth_blockNumber","eth_getTransactionCount","wallet_watchAsset","eth_subscribe"],
        "notifications": ["eth_subscription"],
      },
    },
    "scopedProperties": {
      "eip155:1": {
        "eip3085": [
          "chainName": "Ethereum (Infura)",
          "rpcUrls": ["https://mainnet.infura.io"],
          "nativeCurrency": {
              "name": "ETH",
              "symbol": "ETH",
              "decimals": 18,
          },
        ],
      },
      "eip155:59144": {
        "eip3085": [
          "chainName": "Linea (Infura)",
          "rpcUrls": ["https://rpc.linea.build"],
          "nativeCurrency": {
              "name": "ETH",
              "symbol": "ETH",
              "decimals": 18,
          },
        ],
      },
    },
  },
};
```

### Response
An example structure for the corresponding JSON-RPC response that an application would receive from the wallet:

```js
{
  "id": 1,
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "result": {
    "sessionScopes": { 

>       "eip155:wallet": {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      "wallet:eip155": {
```

          "methods": ["wallet_addEthereumChain"],
          "notifications": [],

>           "accounts": ["eip155:wallet:0x0910e12C68d02B561a34569E1367c9AAb42bd810"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          "accounts": ["wallet:eip155:0x0910e12C68d02B561a34569E1367c9AAb42bd810"]
```

author(s): Alex Donesky (@adonesky1), Jiexi Luan (@jiexi), Vandan Parikh(@vandan) 
type: Maintainer
created: 2024-10-28
---

## Summary
This proposal supplements [MIP-x](./mip-x-multichainapi.md) with additional specifications for EVM networks.

## Motivation
Current single chain EVM Wallet APIs severely limit EVM dapp development and cause a great deal of unnecessary friction for users operating in an ecosystem with rapidly growing number of chains. As such, Dapp developers and end users stand to benefit tremendously from the improved DevEx and UX that the Multichain API will provide. 

The Multichain API will enable the following benefits for developers:
- Concurrent cross chain state reading
- Elimination of chain switching
- Improved connection flows, with better interfaces for dapps to understand wallet capabilities and add missing networks on the fly.

## Usage Example
### Request
An example structure for a JSON-RPC request that an application would send to request authorization(s) from MetaMask:

```js
{
  "id": 1,
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "method": "wallet_createSession",
  "params": {
    "optionalScopes": {
      "wallet:eip155": {

>         "methods": ["wallet_addEthereumChain"],

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        "methods": ["wallet_addEthereumChain"],
        "notifications": [],
```

      },
      "eip155:1": {
        "methods": ["eth_sendTransaction","eth_call","eth_getBalance","eth_blockNumber","eth_getTransactionCount","wallet_watchAsset","eth_subscribe"],

>         "notifications": ["message"],

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        "notifications": ["eth_subscription"],
```

      },
      "eip155:59144": {
        "methods": ["eth_sendTransaction","eth_call","eth_getBalance","eth_blockNumber","eth_getTransactionCount","wallet_watchAsset","eth_subscribe"],

>         "notifications": ["message"],

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        "notifications": ["eth_subscription"],
```

      },
    },
    "scopedProperties": {
      "eip155:1": {
        "eip3085": {

>           "rpcEndpoints": [{

Reviewer: do we want to support multiple suggested rpcs per scope?

Author: I'm not sure about `rpcEndpoints`, but I think we should follow EIP-3085 format which allows for multiple `rpcUrls` to be specified.

            "chainName": "Ethereum (Infura)",
            "rpcUrls": ["https://mainnet.infura.io"],
            "nativeCurrency": {
                "name": "ETH",
                "symbol": "ETH",
                "decimals": 18,
            },

>             "iconURLs": ["https://example.com/ethereum.svg"]

Reviewer: probably should exclude iconUrls given we don't support them

Author: Yeah, in the existing API we mark it as optional, so I'll remove it from the example 👍

          }],
        },
      },
      "eip155:59144": {
        "eip3085": {
          "rpcEndpoints": [{
          "chainName": "Linea (Infura)",
          "rpcUrls": ["https://rpc.linea.build"],
          "nativeCurrency": {
              "name": "ETH",
              "symbol": "ETH",
              "decimals": 18,
          },
          "iconURLs": ["https://example.com/linea.svg"]
          }],
        },
      },
    },
  },
};
```

### Response
An example structure for the corresponding JSON-RPC response that an application would receive from the wallet:

```js
{
  "id": 1,
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "result": {
    "sessionScopes": { 
      "eip155:wallet": {

>           "methods": ["wallet_addEthereumChain"],

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          "methods": ["wallet_addEthereumChain"],
          "notifications": [],
```

### Valid scopedProperties
A dapp may include metadata for `rpcEndpoints` in the `scopedProperties` object to suggest (and provide the required networkConfiguration for) the addition of a given network which the wallet instance does not yet have installed. MetaMask will expect the `rpcEndpoints` parameter to conform to the [EIP-3085](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-3085) standard interface.

> **Note:** MetaMask does not yet support network additions via the [CAIP-25](https://chainagnostic.org/CAIPs/caip-25) connection flow, but will in the future. 

### API Specification Document
An OpenRPC [specification for the Multichain API](https://github.com/MetaMask/api-specs/blob/main/multichain/openrpc.yaml) can be found in the [api-specs](https://github.com/MetaMask/api-specs) repository.

## Caveats
While most methods from the existing API will also be available on the Multichain API, the new API renders some methods and notifications redundant or incompatible. The following methods will not be supported through the Multichain API. However, they will remain accessible through the injected [EIP-1193][eip-1193] API for backwards compatibility.

**Discontinued Methods:**

> eth_requestAccounts
> eth_chainId
> eth_getEncryptionPublicKey
> eth_decrypt
> eth_accounts
> wallet_getPermissions
> wallet_requestPermissions
> wallet_revokePermissions
> wallet_switchEthereumChain
> eth_signTypedData
> eth_signTypedData_v3

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- eth_requestAccounts
- eth_chainId
- eth_getEncryptionPublicKey
- eth_decrypt
- eth_accounts
- wallet_getPermissions
- wallet_requestPermissions
- wallet_revokePermissions
- wallet_switchEthereumChain
- eth_signTypedData
- eth_signTypedData_v3

```

**Discontinued Events:**
- connect
- disconnect
- chainChanged

> - accountsChanged

Reviewer: technically `message` is also discontinued / changed to `wallet_notify`

The Multichain API will enable the following benefits for developers:
- Concurrent cross chain state reading
- Elimination of chain switching
- Improved connection flows, with better interfaces for dapps to understand wallet capabilities and add missing networks on the fly.

## Usage Example
### Request
An example structure for a JSON-RPC request that an application would send to request authorization(s) from MetaMask:

```js
{
  "id": 1,
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "method": "wallet_createSession",
  "params": {
    "optionalScopes": {
      "wallet:eip155": {
        "methods": ["wallet_addEthereumChain"],
        "notifications": [],
      },
      "eip155:1": {
        "methods": ["eth_sendTransaction","eth_call","eth_getBalance","eth_blockNumber","eth_getTransactionCount","wallet_watchAsset","eth_subscribe"],
        "notifications": ["eth_subscription"],
      },
      "eip155:59144": {
        "methods": ["eth_sendTransaction","eth_call","eth_getBalance","eth_blockNumber","eth_getTransactionCount","wallet_watchAsset","eth_subscribe"],
        "notifications": ["eth_subscription"],
      },
    },
    "scopedProperties": {
      "eip155:1": {
        "eip3085": {

>           "rpcEndpoints": [{

Reviewer 2: do we need to nest it like this? Seems like it could be
"scopedProperties": {
      "eip155:1": {
        "eip3085": [
            "chainName": "Ethereum (Infura)",
            "rpcUrls": ["https://mainnet.infura.io"],
            "nativeCurrency": {
                "name": "ETH",
                "symbol": "ETH",
                "decimals": 18,
            },
       ]
    }
}

Author: Yeah, `rpcEndpoints` seemed superfluous. I've attempted to adjust the syntax according to that.
